docs: 33.0.0 release notes (#17872)
apache/druid: docs/release-info/release-notes.md

<!--Replace {{DRUIDVERSION}} with the correct Druid version.-->

> Apache Druid 33.0.0 contains over $NUMBER_FEATURES new features, bug fixes, performance enhancements, documentation improvements, and additional test coverage from $NUMBER_OF_CONTRIBUTORS contributors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Druid 33.0.0 contains over 190 new features, bug fixes, performance enhancements, documentation improvements, and additional test coverage from 44 contributors.
```

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

### Increase segment load speed

> You can now increase the speed at which segments get loaded at the cost of query performance by providing a list of servers for the Coordinator dynamic config `turboLoadingNodes`. For these servers, the Coordinator ignores `druid.coordinator.loadqueuepeon.http.batchSize` and uses the value of the respective `numLoadingThreads` instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now increase the speed at which segments get loaded on a Historical by providing a list of servers for the Coordinator dynamic config `turboLoadingNodes`. For these servers, the Coordinator ignores `druid.coordinator.loadqueuepeon.http.batchSize` and uses the value of the respective `numLoadingThreads` instead. Please note that putting a Historical in turbo-loading mode might affect query performance since more resources would be used by the segment loading threads.
```

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

### Increase segment load speed

> You can now increase the speed at which segments get loaded at the cost of query performance by providing a list of servers for the Coordinator dynamic config `turboLoadingNodes`. For these servers, the Coordinator ignores `druid.coordinator.loadqueuepeon.http.batchSize` and uses the value of the respective `numLoadingThreads` instead.

Reviewer 2: Yes, we can mark it as experimental.

You can use the following Overlord compaction APIs to manage compaction status and configs. These APIs work seamlessly irrespective of whether compaction supervisors are enabled or not.

For more information, see [Compaction APIs](#compaction-apis)

[#17834](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17834)

### Scheduled batch ingestion (experimental)

You can now schedule batch ingestions with the MSQ task engine by using the scheduled batch supervisor. You can specify the schedule using either the standard Unix cron syntax or Quartz cron syntax by setting the `type` field to either `unix` or `quartz`. Unix also supports macro expressions such as `@daily` and others.

Submit your supervisor spec to the `/druid/v2/sql/task/` endpoint.

The following example scheduled batch supervisor spec submits a REPLACE query every 5 minutes:

```json
{
    "type": "scheduled_batch",
    "schedulerConfig": {
        "type": "unix",
        "schedule": "*/5 * * * *"
    },
    "spec": {
        "query": "REPLACE INTO foo OVERWRITE ALL SELECT * FROM bar PARTITIONED BY DAY"
    },
    "suspended": false
}
```

[#17353](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17353)

### Improved S3 upload 

> Druid can now use AWS S3 Transfer Manager for S3 uploads, which can significantly reduce segment upload time. To use this feature, add the following configs to your `common.runtime.properties`: 

Reviewer 3: This is turned on by default. Adjusted the PR description. cc @suraj-goel

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

### Overlord APIs for compaction (experimental)

> You can use the following APIs Overlord APIs (`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction`) to manage compaction status and configs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the following Overlord compaction APIs to manage compaction status and configs. These APIs work seamlessly irrespective of whether compaction supervisors are enabled or not.
```

|Method|Path|Description|Required Permission|
|--------|--------------------------------------------|------------|--------------------|

> |GET|`/config/cluster`|Get the cluster-level compaction config|Read configs|
> |POST|`/config/cluster`|Update the cluster-level compaction config|Write configs|
> |GET|`/config/datasources`|Get the compaction configs for all datasources|Read datasource|
> |GET|`/config/datasources/{dataSource}`|Get the compaction config of a single datasource|Read datasource|
> |POST|`/config/datasources/{dataSource}`|Update the compaction config of a single datasource|Write datasource|
> |GET|`/config/datasources/{dataSource}/history`|Get the compaction config history of a single datasource|Read datasource|
> |GET|`/status/datasources`|Get the compaction status of all datasources|Read datasource|
> |GET|`/status/datasources/{dataSource}`|Get the compaction status of a single datasource|Read datasource|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|GET|`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction/config/cluster`|Get the cluster-level compaction config|Read configs|
|POST|`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction/config/cluster`|Update the cluster-level compaction config|Write configs|
|GET|`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction/config/datasources`|Get the compaction configs for all datasources|Read datasource|
|GET|`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction/config/datasources/{dataSource}`|Get the compaction config of a single datasource|Read datasource|
|POST|`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction/config/datasources/{dataSource}`|Update the compaction config of a single datasource|Write datasource|
|GET|`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction/config/datasources/{dataSource}/history`|Get the compaction config history of a single datasource|Read datasource|
|GET|`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction/status/datasources`|Get the compaction status of all datasources|Read datasource|
|GET|`/druid/indexer/v1/compaction/status/datasources/{dataSource}`|Get the compaction status of a single datasource|Read datasource|
```

#### Other web console improvements

- Added the ability to multi-select in table filters and added suggestions to the **Status** field for tasks and supervisors as well as service type [#17765](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17765)

> - The MERGE INTO keyword is now properly highlighted and the query gets treated as an insert query [#17679](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17679)

Reviewer 3: This need not be called out .

You can now control how many task slots are available for MSQ taskengine controller tasks by using the following configs:

| Property   | Description    | Default value |
|-------|--------------|--------|
| `druid.indexer.queue.controllerTaskSlotRatio` | (Optional) The proportion of available task slots that can be allocated to MSQ task engine controller tasks. This is a floating-point value between 0 and 1                                                            | null          |
| `druid.indexer.queue.maxControllerTaskSlots`  | (Optional) The maximum number of task slots that can be allocated to controller tasks. This is an integer value that defines a hard limit on the number of task slots available for MSQ task engine controller tasks. | null         |

[#16889](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16889)

#### Other cluster management improvements

- Improved logging for permissions issues [#17754](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17754)
- Improved query distribution when `druid.broker.balancer.type` is set to `connectionCount` [#17764](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17764)

### Data management

#### Faster segment metadata operations

> Enable segment metadata caching on the Overlord with theruntime property `druid.manager.segments.useCache`. This feature is off by default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable segment metadata caching on the Overlord with the runtime property `druid.manager.segments.useCache`. This feature is off by default.
```

- Newly added segments are loaded more quickly [#17732](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17732)

### Metrics and monitoring

#### Custom Histogram buckets for Prometheus

You can now configure custom Histogram buckets for `timer` metrics from the Prometheus emitter using the `histogramBuckets` parameter. 

If no custom buckets are provided, the following default buckets are used: `[0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5, 10.0, 30.0, 60.0, 120.0, 300.0]`. If the user does not specify their own JSON file, a default mapping is used.

[#17689](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17689)

#### Segment metadata cache metrics

The following metrics have been added:

The following metrics have been introduced as part of the segment metadata cache performance improvement.

- `segment/used/count`
- `segment/unused/count`
- `segment/pending/count`
- `segment/metadataCache/sync/time`
- `segment/metadataCache/deleted`
- `segment/metadataCache/skipped`
- `segment/metadataCache/used/stale`
- `segment/metadataCache/used/updated`
- `segment/metadataCache/unused/updated`
- `segment/metadataCache/pending/deleted`
- `segment/metadataCache/pending/updated`

> - `segment/metadataCache/pending/skipped`

Reviewer 2: I think we should mention only the following metrics here.
Since this is an experimental feature, several other metrics have been added to track performance but may be removed in the near future.

- `segment/metadataCache/sync/time`
- `segment/metadataCache/transactions/readOnly`
- `segment/metadataCache/transactions/writeOnly`
- `segment/metadataCache/transactions/readWrite`

|`ingest/kafka/maxLag/time`|Max lag time in milliseconds between the current message sequence number consumed by the Kafka indexing tasks and latest sequence number in Kafka across all shards. Minimum emission period for this metric is a minute. Enabled only when `pusblishLagTime` is set to true on supervisor config.|`dataSource`, `stream`, `tags`|Greater than 0, up to max kafka retention period in milliseconds. |
|`ingest/kafka/avgLag/time`|Average lag time in milliseconds between the current message sequence number consumed by the Kafka indexing tasks and latest sequence number in Kafka across all shards. Minimum emission period for this metric is a minute. Enabled only when `pusblishLagTime` is set to true on supervisor config.|`dataSource`, `stream`, `tags`|Greater than 0, up to max kafka retention period in milliseconds. |
|`ingest/kinesis/updateOffsets/time`|Total time (in milliseconds) taken to fetch the latest offsets from Kafka stream and the ingestion tasks.|`dataSource`, `taskId`, `taskType`, `groupId`, `tags`|Generally a few seconds at most.|

[#17735](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17735)

#### Other metrics and monitoring changes

> - Added the `segment/metadataCache/transactions` that describes the number of read or write transactions performed on the cache for a single datasource

Reviewer 2: This can be removed from here. Please see other comment regarding the segment metadata cache metrics.

- The logging level is now set to info. Previously, it was set to debug [#17752](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17752)
- Druid now supports lazy loading of pod templates so that any config changes you make are deployed more quickly [#17701](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17701)
- Removed startup probe so that peon tasks can start up properly without being killed by Kubernetes [#17784](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17784)

### Documentation improvements

## Upgrade notes and incompatible changes

### Upgrade notes

#### `useMaxMemoryEstimates`

`useMaxMemoryEstimates` is now set to false for MSQ task engine tasks. Additionally, the property has been deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Setting this to false allows for better on-heap memory estimation.

[#17792](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17792)

#### Automatic kill tasks interval

Automatic kill tasks are now limited to 30 days or fewer worth of segments per task.

The previous behavior (no limit on interval per kill task) can be restored by setting `druid.coordinator.kill.maxInterval = P0D`.

[#17680](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17680)

#### Kubernetes deployments

> By default, the Docker image now uses the canonical hostname if you're running Druid in Kubernetes. Otherwise, it uses the IP address otherwise [#17697](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17697) 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By default, the Docker image now uses the canonical hostname to register services in ZooKeeper for internal communication if you're running Druid in Kubernetes. Otherwise, it uses the IP address. [#17697](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/17697). 

You can set the environment variable `DRUID_SET_HOST_IP` to `1` to restore old behaviour.
```
